# Corpus métrique de l'ancien français (CorMétAF)

A metrically annotated corpus of Old and Middle French texts.

© Tom Rainsford, Institut für Linguistik/Romanistik, University of Stuttgart, 2008--2026

[https://sites.google.com/site/rainsfordtm/home](https://sites.google.com/site/rainsfordtm/home)

## Contents

+ Description
+ Setup
+ Annotation
+ Sources
+ Appendix: syntag tagset

## Description

The CorMétAF contains seventy-seven extracts from Old and Middle
French verse texts with manually verified metrical annotation. It
was initially developed in the course of my doctoral research
(Rainsford 2011: ch. 2) and has now been published to accompany the
publication of my monograph (Rainsford accepted). It is a forerunner
to the _Old Gallo-Romance Corpus_ (OGR) (Rainsford 2022, 2025).

## Setup

### Quick start guide

1. Download and install the [TXM](https://txm.gitpages.huma-num.fr/textometrie/en/) software
1. Download the `.txm` file included in the latest [release](https://github.com/rainsfordtm/cormetaf/releases) of the CorMétAF
1. Open TXM
1. Click `File > Load > a binary corpus (.txm)` and load the CORMETAF.

### Slow start guide

The main branch of this repository contains the source files for the 
CorMétAF Corpus:
* `cormetaf/csv/textcsv`: source texts
* `cormetaf/cfg`: files necessary for compiling and exporting the corpus
* `cormetaf/doc`: metadata and documentation
* `scripts`: scripts to generate XML-TEI, HTML and PAULA-XML versions.

Before the corpus can be used, the source files must be processed and
exported using the syllabic verse analysis (SylVA) tools available on Sourceforge:  
[https://sourceforge.net/projects/syllabic-verse-analysis/](https://sourceforge.net/projects/syllabic-verse-analysis/)

The resulting XML files must then be imported into TXM using the 
TODO importer.

## Annotation

_This section refers to the annotation available in the compiled TXM 
version of the CorMétAF. Some fields are coded directly in the source
texts while others are added by the SylVa scripts when the corpus is compiled._

The CorMétAF is metrically annotated and has gold part-of-speech and
lemma tags.

### Part-of-speech (syntag)

The part-of-speech tags in the CorMétAF use a bespoke system called
`syntag`. The tagset is given in the appendix. It is envisaged to
complement the `syntag` annotation with a more standard tagset in 
future versions of the corpus and for this reason, no `pos` tag is
given.

The `syntag2` tagset provides extra information about clitics and
pronouns by appending the following symbols to the normal syntag:
+ `$$`: preverbal clitic, i.e. `Neg$$` is a preverbal negative clitic.
+ `%%`: postverbal clitic, i.e. `Prn%%` is a postverbal non-subject clitic pronoun.
+ `$`: directly preverbal subject pronoun (`Prn$`)
+ `%`: directly postverbal subject pronoun (`Prn%`)
+ `$%`: TODO

For the texts extracted from the _Nouveau Corpus d'Amsterdam_ (NCA),
which also has gold part-of-speech annotation, the NCA tag is given
as `pos_nca`.

### Lemmatization (lemma)

Lemmatization in the CorMétAF is stored in the `lemma` column. Like
the _Old Gallo-Romance Corpus_ (OGR) and the _Base de Français médiéval_
(BFM), forms found in the _Dictionnaire du Moyen Français_ (DMF) are
preferred as standard lemmas. Unlike in the OGR, however, there
is no `lemma_src` column giving the precise source of the lemma.

In general, all forms which inflect for case and gender are lemmatized
using the oblique (masculine) singular, which in most cases corresponds
to the contemporary French masculine singular.  Notable exceptions are:
+ the nominative subject pronouns _je_, _tu_, _il_, _elle_ and the disjunctive
third-person pronouns _lui_, _li_, _eux_, _elles_ which are treated as
separate lemmas;
+ the demonstratives _cil_ and _cist_, which are lemmatized using the
nominative singular to prevent confusion with the very different syntax
of their contemporary French descendents;
+ a limited number of common nouns where the DMF **only** contains the 
nominative as the headword, typically because only the nominative survives
into contemporary French, e.g. _traître_, _prêtre_.
+ many proper nouns, in particular where the former nominative is
predominant in contemporary French, e.g. _Charles_ not _Charlon_.

### Metrical annotation (line_met, metpos, soptem, prosody)

Metrical annotation is generated by the SylVA scripts and is found only
in the compiled corpus. It uses the same four word-level properties
as those found in the [OGR corpus](http://ogr-corpus.org/docs/annotation-sylls/#4-the-txm-version).

The tag `prosody` is a three-character string representing the prosody of the word.
The first character is the number of syllables. The final two characters
give the stress pattern, which is either:

+ `cl`: a clitic
+ `ox`: an oxytone, i.e. stressed on the final syllable
+ `po`: a paroxytone, i.e. stressed on the penultimate syllable
+ `pp`: a proparoxytone, i.e. stressed on the antepenultimate syllable

For example for _parler_ `prosody="2ox"` (a two-syllable oxytone), for 
_femme_ `prosody="2po"` (a two-syllable paroxytone) and for _le_ `prosody="1cl"`
(a monosyllabic clitic).

The tags `metpos` and `soptem` are strings representing the metrical position of all the syllables in the word. The
principle is similar to [`syll_metpos`](#31-syll_metpos) but applied to the whole word.
+ The metrical position of each syllable is represented by two digits
	+ `metpos` counts forwards from the start of the line, `soptem` backwards from the end of the line. 
+ Different metrical positions are separated by dots
+ The final character of the string is either `r` (rhyme), `c` (caesura) or `-` (neither)

For example, the word _ancienur_ (_Alexis_, l. 1) occupies the last four metrical positions
of a decasyllabic line. It therefore has `metpos="07.08.09.10.r"` and `soptem="04.03.02.01.r`.

__Tip__: `soptem` is `metpos` backwards, to help remember which is which!

The tag `line_met` is a five-character string summarizing the key metrical properties of the line.

+ characters __1 and 2__: Number of syllables in the scanned line, e.g. `08`, `10`. If the line is irregular and could not
be scanned, this will give the actual number of syllables in the line rather than the target length.
+ character __3__: nature of the rhyme: __m__asculine, __f__eminine, or `-` for irregular lines.
+ character __4__: nature of the cæsura: __n__ormal (stress, word boundary), __e__pic (stress, uncounted
post-tonic syllables), __l__yric (no stress, word boundary), or `-` for irregular lines.
+ character __5__: cæsura position, e.g. `4`, or `-` for irregular lines. Note that the scanner only checks for cæsura in
standard positions, so for a decasyllable the cæsura will be either `4` or `-`.

`line_met` can be queried with a simple regex, e.g.:

+ decasyllable with epic cæsura: `line_met=/10.e./`
+ octosyllable with feminine rhyme: `line_met=/08f../`

There is also a `line_correct` tag, with values `True` if the line could be scanned and `False` if not.

### A note on `syllabified`

The source texts contain a `syllabified` column (see Rainsford 2022 and
the [OGR corpus documentation](http://ogr-corpus.org/docs/annotation-sylls/#42-syllabified)
for details).

In the CorMétAF, the `syllabified` column **doesn't** represent the
segmental structure of the word. It was automatically created from a far
simpler original annotation which just indicated the number of syllables and
a number of special syllable "types" (e.g. elidable syllables). However,
since the first version of the CorMétAF was created, the SylVA scripts
have been modified to require all phonological annotation to be in
`syllabified` format.

Long story short: you'll might notice that a word like _ouïr_ has the
`syllabified` representation `/V\.'C/V\` in the sources of the CorMétAF.
Yes, this is "wrong". No, there are no plans to "correct" it because it
provides all the information that the SylVA scripts need: a two-syllable,
vowel-initial word stressed on the final syllable.

The `syllabified` annotation has been removed from the compiled corpus.


